# Doing Machine Learning for the First Time

Jillian Anderson    
Simon Fraser University 

Part of my day-to-day involves supporting researchers from the university or our government and industry partners on technical projects. This can include anything from helping to debug web-scraping scripts to setting up web applications for visualization. Often, it includes working with a researcher interested in using machine learning for the first time. During these collaborations I try to impart some of the information I wish I had known when I used machine learning for the first time.

1. **Machine learning might not be as large of a leap as you think.** It’s easy to be intimidated by machine learning if you focus on intimidating sounding algorithms like “support vector machines” and “deep neural networks.” However, some of the more classic machine learning algorithms may be quite familiar to you. Algorithms like linear regression, clustering, or decision trees are often intuitive and arise in other contexts without being introduced as a machine learning algorithm. In fact, some of these algorithms are so intuitive that I’ve had researchers unknowingly implement their own versions of these algorithms before seeking me out to help them implement machine learning algorithms.
2. **Put the work into implementing automated documentation of hyper-parameter tuning — it's well worth the effort.** It is an exciting feeling to get a machine learning model working on a new dataset for the first time. This excitement often fuels iterative tweaks to hyperparameters in an attempt to improve the model as quickly as possible. The list of iterations often grows more quickly than we expect, and soon, despite our best intentions, we begin to lose track of exactly what combinations have been attempted. Before getting carried away with model building and hyperparameter tuning, I suggest investing time upfront to automate hyper-parameter documentation. Ideally, every time you train a model, documentation should be automatically generated to capture hyperparameters and evaluation results.
3. **Budget more time than you think you need for data collection and annotation.** Many machine learning algorithms require annotated data for model training. Annotated data includes features the model will use to make a prediction and the correct prediction. This data is what allows a machine learning model to learn exactly how to make a prediction. However, annotated data isn’t always easy to come by. You will usually need to collect raw data and find a way to annotate it yourself. As is often the case, the options for how you can label this data come with tradeoffs. For example, while online annotation platforms can provide a large workforce who can turn around an annotated dataset in a matter of days, some require you to provide unrestricted license to the data. These platforms are rarely suitable when working with personal, protected, or licensed data. Depending on your task, you may be able to reach out to passionate groups of domain experts, spread the task amongst your lab, or hire on assistance for this task. Regardless, don’t forget to include data annotation in your project plan and budget more time than you initially think is required, especially for your first few projects.
